README.md, before:

# dc2

`dc2` is a lightweight EC2 emulator that runs Docker containers instead of
virtual machines. It is designed for local testing and CI workflows that need
an EC2-like API surface.

## Quick Start

### Run from GHCR

`dc2` needs access to the Docker socket because instances/volumes are backed by
local Docker resources.

```sh
docker run --rm \
  --name dc2 \
  -p 8080:8080 \
  -e ADDR=0.0.0.0:8080 \
  -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
  ghcr.io/fiam/dc2:latest
```

Then point your AWS SDK/CLI to `http://localhost:8080`:

```sh
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=test \
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=test \
AWS_REGION=us-east-1 \
aws ec2 describe-instances --endpoint-url http://localhost:8080
```

### Compose Setup for Integration Tests

```yaml
services:
  dc2:
    image: ghcr.io/fiam/dc2:latest
    ports: ["8080:8080"]
    environment:
      ADDR: 0.0.0.0:8080
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

In your test container/app, configure the EC2/Auto Scaling clients to use
`http://dc2:8080` as the service endpoint.
Instance containers can access IMDS at
`http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data` and
`http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/instance-id` by default.
Metadata reads require an IMDSv2 token from `PUT /latest/api/token` first.
The shared IMDS proxy runs as a dedicated OpenResty container and routes
requests to the owning `dc2` process.

## Workload Network Reachability

By default, `RunInstances` containers are attached to Docker's `bridge`
network. If your test stack runs on another Docker network, those containers
are usually not directly reachable.

To make workload instances reachable from other containers, set
`INSTANCE_NETWORK=<network-name>` (or `--instance-network <network-name>`) and
attach your test stack to the same Docker network.

If the named network already exists, `dc2` uses it as-is. Existing networks do
not need the `dc2:owned-network=true` label.

If the named network does not exist, `dc2` creates it and labels it
`dc2:owned-network=true`, then removes it when unused during shutdown.

When `INSTANCE_NETWORK` is unset, `dc2` uses `bridge` and does not own/remove
that network.

Use `DescribeInstances` to discover the instance address to call from your
test containers on the workload network.
In `dc2`, `PublicIpAddress` currently mirrors `PrivateIpAddress`, so either
field points to the same reachable container IP on that network.

For runnable walkthroughs and scripts, see `examples/README.md`.

## Exit Resource Mode

`dc2` controls shutdown cleanup/verification with `--exit-resource-mode` (or
`DC2_EXIT_RESOURCE_MODE`):

- `cleanup` (default): delete owned resources on exit, then fail shutdown if
  any owned resources remain.
- `keep`: do not cleanup or verify owned resources.
- `assert`: do not cleanup, but fail shutdown if owned resources remain.

## API Status

| Area | Status | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| EC2 Instances | Partial | Lifecycle APIs plus IMDSv2 instance-id/user-data/tag metadata support. |
| EC2 Volumes | Supported | Create/attach/detach/delete + describe pagination. |
| EC2 Launch Templates | Partial | Create/describe/delete/versioning + default-version updates. |
| Auto Scaling Groups | Supported | Create/describe/update/set desired/delete, including event-driven replacement after out-of-band instance container delete/stop and Docker healthcheck failures. |

See `docs/API_SURFACE.md` for the detailed per-action compatibility matrix.
See `docs/IMDS.md` for IMDS architecture and behavior details.

Commit message:

feat(runtime): set DC2_RUNTIME by dc2 mode
Set DC2_RUNTIME to host when dc2 runs directly on the host and
container when dc2 runs in Docker.

Propagate the value to instance containers, the main dc2 container,
and the shared IMDS proxy, and update integration coverage and README
documentation accordingly.

README.md, after:

# dc2

`dc2` is a lightweight EC2 emulator that runs Docker containers instead of
virtual machines. It is designed for local testing and CI workflows that need
an EC2-like API surface.

## Quick Start

### Run from GHCR

`dc2` needs access to the Docker socket because instances/volumes are backed by
local Docker resources.

```sh
docker run --rm \
  --name dc2 \
  -p 8080:8080 \
  -e ADDR=0.0.0.0:8080 \
  -v /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock \
  ghcr.io/fiam/dc2:latest
```

Then point your AWS SDK/CLI to `http://localhost:8080`:

```sh
AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=test \
AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=test \
AWS_REGION=us-east-1 \
aws ec2 describe-instances --endpoint-url http://localhost:8080
```

### Compose Setup for Integration Tests

```yaml
services:
  dc2:
    image: ghcr.io/fiam/dc2:latest
    ports: ["8080:8080"]
    environment:
      ADDR: 0.0.0.0:8080
    volumes:
      - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock
```

In your test container/app, configure the EC2/Auto Scaling clients to use
`http://dc2:8080` as the service endpoint.
Instance containers can access IMDS at
`http://169.254.169.254/latest/user-data` and
`http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/instance-id` by default.
Metadata reads require an IMDSv2 token from `PUT /latest/api/token` first.
The shared IMDS proxy runs as a dedicated OpenResty container and routes
requests to the owning `dc2` process.
All dc2-managed containers include `DC2_RUNTIME`:
- `host` when `dc2` is running directly on the host.
- `container` when `dc2` is running in a container.

## Workload Network Reachability

By default, `RunInstances` containers are attached to Docker's `bridge`
network. If your test stack runs on another Docker network, those containers
are usually not directly reachable.

To make workload instances reachable from other containers, set
`INSTANCE_NETWORK=<network-name>` (or `--instance-network <network-name>`) and
attach your test stack to the same Docker network.

If the named network already exists, `dc2` uses it as-is. Existing networks do
not need the `dc2:owned-network=true` label.

If the named network does not exist, `dc2` creates it and labels it
`dc2:owned-network=true`, then removes it when unused during shutdown.

When `INSTANCE_NETWORK` is unset, `dc2` uses `bridge` and does not own/remove
that network.

Use `DescribeInstances` to discover the instance address to call from your
test containers on the workload network.
In `dc2`, `PublicIpAddress` currently mirrors `PrivateIpAddress`, so either
field points to the same reachable container IP on that network.

For runnable walkthroughs and scripts, see `examples/README.md`.

## Exit Resource Mode

`dc2` controls shutdown cleanup/verification with `--exit-resource-mode` (or
`DC2_EXIT_RESOURCE_MODE`):

- `cleanup` (default): delete owned resources on exit, then fail shutdown if
  any owned resources remain.
- `keep`: do not cleanup or verify owned resources.
- `assert`: do not cleanup, but fail shutdown if owned resources remain.

## API Status

| Area | Status | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- |
| EC2 Instances | Partial | Lifecycle APIs plus IMDSv2 instance-id/user-data/tag metadata support. |
| EC2 Volumes | Supported | Create/attach/detach/delete + describe pagination. |
| EC2 Launch Templates | Partial | Create/describe/delete/versioning + default-version updates. |
| Auto Scaling Groups | Supported | Create/describe/update/set desired/delete, including event-driven replacement after out-of-band instance container delete/stop and Docker healthcheck failures. |

See `docs/API_SURFACE.md` for the detailed per-action compatibility matrix.
See `docs/IMDS.md` for IMDS architecture and behavior details.
